yawning of Elaine done movin de Kooning
in the late 1940s demonstrates the
artists technical grace his skills as a
draftsman and is understanding of
proportion and illusionary space
consequently it's probably the most
boring de Kooning piece you will ever
encounter it also demonstrates the deep
affection and respect he had for his
wife depicting here in such a way and
like the ghoulish works he is most
famous for this on the other hand is
more representative de Kooning approach
to making an image proportions start
become exaggerated and unimportant
familiar forms break down the mark
making is wild and full of energy
completely unbound it's clear at this
point that the Kooning is having fun
experimenting wildly with the
potentialities within both abstraction
and representation this is a study for
the first piece of the women's series
this drawing demonstrates premeditation
that goes into making a de Kooning
painting drawing went on to inform the
approach de Kooning would take upon
entering women one and is important in
the case of having a point of departure
a way of entering a painting that will
neva bleached and reorient itself in a
way that is completely unrecognizable
from the original study woman won the
first and arguably most important of the
women series it's as terrifying and
violent as it is hilarious the figures
right arm is flayed open skin tissue and
bone disintegrates into the flatness of
the surrounding shape red paint is
sponsored under the confrontational
oversized eyeballs suggesting a violent
encounter blood splattering the figures
teeth Nash at you they would clearly
bite you given the opportunity her legs
like any shred of humanity instead
they're disjointed and bent back coming
not two feet but
who's this lady is a beast while not as
overtly funny as some of his other work
in the context of the relationship to a
classical figurative tradition woman 1
is pretty hilarious it's essentially an
open mockery of the Cartesian ideal of
feminine beauty process of making these
paintings was just as aggressive as the
imagery the surface is built up an image
is created it's then scraped back
reconfigured from the ghosts of the
previous arrangement of color and shape
you would employ such tactics as
adhering newsprint to the surface of the
wet painting and then ripping it away
transferring an impression or trace onto
the newsprint which would then
constitute the foundation of a new work
de Kooning had a rich body a figurative
work outside of his initial exploration
into the subject matter this drawing a
study for the painting pink angels as an
example of de Kooning abstract
experimentation being in service to what
will ultimately be a representation of
the human figure what started out as
pure abstraction becomes
representational there's a dialogue
between representational symbolism and
the unintelligible ax t of de Kooning
abstract language the interpretations
concerning violence and hatred of women
must have come as quite a surprise to de
Kooning he sincerely felt who's making
humorous images cacophonous color
combinations the comically exaggerated
sexual organs and generally distorted
forms contrast in their new you're
against the well-adjusted cartesian
ideal he creates images that are
hilarious and their schizophrenia
profoundly humorous in the context of
their relationship with classicism just
look at this I don't think it's too hard
to imagine Willem de Kooning standing
behind a desk and laughing maniacally to
themselves as he created this image
every feature of the women paintings is
a product of the tireless reworking of a
surface
a product of spontaneity that is
discarded but ultimately serves to
inform the future reworkings there trace
left behind on the canvas which
ultimately serves as a foundation for
the next stage of the painting the
economy of the brushstrokes in the
intensity of the hues combined with
feverish mark-making give their work
their illusion of hairiness violent
terrifying or humorous regardless of
your interpretation the attorneys
approach to painting is as revolutionary
as it is ingenious process takes over
and consequently the final product
depends almost entirely on the
spontaneous act of the destructive de
Kooning painting session and finally the
discussion questions one do you agree
that the imagery in de Kooning is work
is violent why or why not and to do you
feel like these works are subversively
or overtly humorous not humorous at all
why and so concludes my long awaited and
more than likely underwhelming
presentation on the artwork of Willem de
Kooning